# 2023-03-31

## Actually keeping this developer diary would be helpful!

It's been a while since we've started working on the new version of Sleepy Bike, and we haven't been active in writing this journal and documentation. But it would be very useful, for clarifying thoughts. And maybe even useful to people who learn developing Solid apps.

## Implementing messages

Last week we've implemented the messaging. Currently, there are two data models that i know of. One keeps the conversation on a single pod, the other keeps messages of each person on sender's pod, and merely informs the receiver that a message has been sent.

The first model seems to be the mainstream one, used by SolidOS and maybe also liqid.chat, but it has issues. In the exchange, one person, the one who hosts the conversation, has more power than the other. This person can edit or delete the conversation as they please, while the other can (probably) only append new messages.

The second model treats both (all) participants more fairly. Each keeps their own messages.

We chose the second model. Because the participants are equal.

This data model has been pioneered and implemented by folks of [POD-CHAT](https://pod-chat.com). You can read more about this data model in [their code repository](https://github.com/0l5en/pod-chat-client/blob/main/doc/solid-model.md). It works as follows:

* Alice writes first time to Bob
  1. A chat is created in Alice's pod. It contains document with info about chat participants.
  1. Message is created in Alice's chat for the current day.
  1. An ActivityStreams notification is created in Bob's pod's inbox. It contains link to the message and chat in Alice's pod.

* Bob responds to Alice
  1. Notification from Alice is found in inbox.
  1. Bob can accept or reject the chat.
  1. A chat is created in Bob's pod. It contains info about the participants, and it contains reference to Alice's chat.
  1. Message is created in Bob's chat for the current day.
  1. AS notification is created in Alice's inbox.

* Alice reads Bob's response
  1. Notification from Bob is found in Alice's inbox.
  1. Alice saves the reference to Bob's part of the chat into her part.

* Conversation continues
  1. Alice and Bob can create messages in their own chat, and send notifications about the messages to other person's inbox. The notifications are then read by the receiver, and deleted.

It would be interesting if both chat models could be made compatible. Otherwise we have two competing client-to-client standards, and that's not good.

We tried to be compatible with [pod-chat.com](https://pod-chat.com), but it doesn't work. It seems that POD-CHAT assumes base folder, in which the chat should live. So if we save chat in other than the default folder, the chat isn't displayed in the pod-chat.com app. We opened an [issue on GitHub](https://github.com/0l5en/pod-chat-client/issues/43) about this.

## Next: Implementing contacts

We'd like to show who a person knows. We'll use `foaf:knows` predicate for this. When both people say they `foaf:knows` each other, we'll treat them as contacts of each other.

Questions:

Keep contacts generic; outside of the context of the hospex community, or not?
Keep the contacts public, or make them private?
There are also more complex solutions, e.g. sharing the contacts only with contacts to a certain depth.

It would be nice if we could then keep sharing our hospex info with our contacts (of certain depth) directly. This way, we could eventually avoid a need for the hospex community; or at least it wouldn't need to play a central role in discovery and permissions. And if the central part goes wrong, the network would keep existing. That would be really nice.

So we'll probably do something like:

1. Create a contact and send a notification to the other person.
1. Other person creates the contact, too.
1. Each person adds the other to their hospex permissions.
1. Display a list of person's confirmed contacts.
